docs: add migration page to user guide (#2596)
zarr-developers/zarr-python: docs/user-guide/v3_migration.rst

3.0 Migration Guide
===================

Zarr-Python 3.0 introduces a number of changes to the API, including a number
of significant breaking changes and pending deprecations.

> This page provides a guide highlighting the most notable changes to help you
> migrate your code from version 2 to version 3.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This page provides a guide explaining the breaking changes to help you
migrate your code from version 2 to version 3.
If we have missed anything, please open a `GitHub issue <https://github.com/zarr-developers/zarr-python/issues/new>`_ so we can impove this guide.
```

> Zarr-Python 3.0 introduces a number of changes to the API, including a number
> of significant breaking changes and pending deprecations.
> 
> This page provides a guide highlighting the most notable changes to help you
> migrate your code from version 2 to version 3.
> 
> Zarr-Python 3 represents a major refactor of the Zarr-Python codebase. Some of the
> goals motivating this refactor included:
> 
> * adding support for the Zarr V3 specification (alongside the Zarr V2 specification)
> * cleaning up internal and user facing APIs
> * improving performance (particularly in high latency storage environments like
>   cloud object store)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Zarr-Python 3 represents a major refactor of the Zarr-Python codebase. Some of the
goals motivating this refactor included:

* adding support for the Zarr V3 specification (alongside the Zarr V2 specification)
* cleaning up internal and user facing APIs
* improving performance (particularly in high latency storage environments like
  cloud object store)
  
To accomodate this, Zarr-Python 3.0 introduces a number of changes to the API, including a number
of significant breaking changes and pending deprecations.

This page provides a guide highlighting the most notable changes to help you
migrate your code from version 2 to version 3.
```
I think this is a more logical order, which motivates the changes first.

Author: nice suggestion. thanks.

Compatibility target
--------------------

The goals described above necessitated some breaking changes to the API (hence the

> major version update), but we have attempted to maintain ~95% backwards compatibility

Reviewer: ```suggestion
major version update), but where poissible we have maintained backwards compatibility
```

in the most widely used parts of the API. This in the :class:`zarr.Array` and
:class:`zarr.Group` classes and the "top-level API" (e.g. :func:`zarr.open_array` and
:func:`zarr.open_group`).

Getting ready for 3.0
---------------------

> Ahead of the 3.0 release, we suggest projects that depend on Zarr-Python take the

Reviewer: If the plan is to release in 6 days time, then I don't think there's much point adding a new section to the docs that says "Ahead of the 3.0 release...". I'd suggest moving the "Using zarr Python v2" section up here, and adding the pinning advice to that section. Then the flow is

1. How to continue using v2
2. How to transition to v3

Author: Reworked this section. I still think a "getting ready" section is useful because projects will choose when to migrate based on their own situation.

     to either a) modify your application to no longer rely on these imports or b)
     vendor the parts of the specific modules that you need.

     * ``zarr.attrs``
     * ``zarr.codecs``
     * ``zarr.context``
     * ``zarr.core``
     * ``zarr.hierarchy``
     * ``zarr.indexing``
     * ``zarr.meta``
     * ``zarr.meta_v1``
     * ``zarr.storage``
     * ``zarr.sync``
     * ``zarr.types``
     * ``zarr.util``
     * ``zarr.n5``

3. Test that your package works with v3. You can start testing against version 3 now
   (pre-releases are being published to PyPI weekly).
4. Update the pin to zarr >=3

Continue using Zarr-Python 2
----------------------------

Zarr-Python 2.x is still available, though we recommend migrating to Zarr-Python 3 for
its improvements and new features. Security and bug fixes will be made to the 2.x series
for at least 6 months following the first Zarr-Python 3 release.
If you need to use the latest Zarr-Python 2 release, you can install it with:

.. code-block:: console

    $ pip install "zarr==2.*"

Migration Guide
---------------

The following sections provide details on the most important changes in Zarr-Python 3.

The Array class
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> 1. Disallow direct construction - use :func:`zarr.open_array` or :func:`zarr.create_array`

Reviewer: It's not clear here whether direct contstruction is:

- No longer possible
- Deprecated
- Possible, but discouraged

Author: It is no longer possible (in the same way as it was before). I've clarified this.

   instead of directly constructing the :class:`zarr.Array` class.

2. Defaulting to ``zarr_format=3`` - newly created arrays will use the version 3 of the
   Zarr specification. To continue using version 2, set ``zarr_format=2`` when creating arrays
   or set ``default_zarr_version=2`` in :ref:`config`.

The Group class
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

1. Disallow direct construction - use :func:`zarr.open_group` or :func:`zarr.create_group`
   instead of directly constructing the :class:`zarr.Group` class.

> 2. Deprecated most of the h5py compatibility methods. The following migration is suggested:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Most of the h5py compatibility methods are deprecated. The following migration is suggested:
```

> 2. Deprecated most of the h5py compatibility methods. The following migration is suggested:

Reviewer: Are the suggested functions drop in replacements with the same arguments? If not, can we provide a clearer guide on how to translate existing calls to create_dataset/require_dataset to create_array/require_array?

Author: yes, they are drop in replacements.

   - Use :func:`zarr.Group.create_array` in place of :func:`zarr.Group.create_dataset`
   - Use :func:`zarr.Group.require_array` in place of :func:`zarr.Group.require_dataset`

The Store class
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Some of the biggest changes in Zarr-Python 3 are found in the ``Store`` class. The most notable changes to the Store API are:

1. Replaced the ``MutableMapping`` base class in favor of a custom abstract base class (:class:`zarr.abc.store.Store`).

> 2. Switched to a primarily Async interface.

Reviewer: What does this mean in conrete terms for a user? Is it just a behind the scenes change (if so, why was it done? what benefits does it bring?), or does the user have to adapt their code for this change?

Author: expanded the language on the async store interface

> Beyond the changes store interface, a number of deprecated stores were also removed in Zarr-Python 3:

Reviewer: What are we recommending users who use these stores do? Create their own custom stores? Or migrate to other options?

Author: Added additional details for all stores. 

tldr; n5/abs stores have external alternatives. the rest would require a custom store that zarr-python is unlikely to maintain unless they are added to the spec.

- ``N5Store``
- ``DBMStore``
- ``LMDBStore``
- ``SQLiteStore``
- ``MongoDBStore``
- ``RedisStore``
- ``ABSStore``

> Dependencies Changes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Dependency Changes
```

Author: done.

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

When installing using `pip`:
```
Since this doesn't apply to conda installs.

Author: done.

- The new ``remote`` dependency group can be used to install a supported version of
  ``fsspec``, required for remote data access.
- The new ``gpu`` dependency group can be used to install a supported version of
  ``cuda``, required for GPU functionality.
- The ``jupyter`` optional dependency group has been removed, since v3 contains no
  jupyter specific functionality.

Configuration
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> There is a new configuration system based on `donfig <https://github.com/pytroll/donfig>`_,

Reviewer: I think this should be in a what's new, not a migration guide, since there's no functionality from v2 in this section.

Author: I disagree. The new runtime configuration object (`zarr.config`) collects a number of options that were present in v2 in other places.

Reviewer: Ah I didn't realise - in that case, this should be expanded to explain how users migrate from the old zarr.config system to the new system.

Author: there was not an "old zarr.config" system. Runtime parameters were scattered throughout the API.

Reviewer: Is there an example of code that someone would write in v2, which they now have to use the configuration system for instead? I think should be the measure of if something should go in the migration guide or not.

Author: removed the config section.

which can be accessed via :mod:`zarr.core.config`.
Configuration values can be set using code like the following:

.. code-block:: python

   import zarr
   zarr.config.set({"array.order": "F"})

Alternatively, configuration values can be set using environment variables,
e.g. ``ZARR_ARRAY__ORDER=F``.

Configuration options include the following:

- Default Zarr format ``default_zarr_version``
- Default array order in memory ``array.order``
- Default codecs ``array.v3_default_codecs`` and ``array.v2_default_compressor``
- Whether empty chunks are written to storage ``array.write_empty_chunks``
- Async and threading options, e.g. ``async.concurrency`` and ``threading.max_workers``
- Selections of implementations of codecs, codec pipelines and buffers

Miscellaneous
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> - The keyword argument ``zarr_version`` has been deprecated in favor of ``zarr_format``.

Reviewer: What functions is this an argument to?

Author: added notes clarifying this.

🚧 Work in Progress 🚧
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Zarr-Python 3 is still under active development, and is not yet fully complete.
The following list summarizes areas of the codebase that we expect to build out
after the 3.0 release:

- The following functions / methods have not been ported to Zarr-Python 3 yet:

  * :func:`zarr.copy`

>   * :func:`zarr.copy_all`

Reviewer: According to https://github.com/zarr-developers/zarr-python/issues/2407#issuecomment-2494045572, copy and copy_all aren't going to be ported at all?

Author: Right, we haven't taken any action there yet though.

Reviewer: Is the plan to eventually implement `copy` and `copy_all`, or not? Currently this PR implies yes, but https://github.com/zarr-developers/zarr-python/issues/2407#issuecomment-2494045572 implies no.

  * :func:`zarr.copy_store`
  * :func:`zarr.Group.move`

> - The following options in the top-level API have not been ported to Zarr-Python 3 yet.

Reviewer: What does "options in the top-level API" mean? Config options? Or arguments (and if so, to which functions?)

>   If these options are important to you, please open a

Reviewer: Perhaps move this request for issues up to the top of this section, so it applies to all the bullet points and not just this one?

  `GitHub issue <https://github.com/zarr-developers/zarr-python/issues/new>`_ describing
  your use case.

  * ``cache_attrs``
  * ``cache_metadata``
  * ``chunk_store``
  * ``meta_array``
  * ``object_codec``
  * ``synchronizer``
  * ``dimension_separator``

> - The following features have not been ported to Zarr-Python 3 yet:

Reviewer: Do we want folks to open github issues if they want these features too?

3.0 Migration Guide
===================

> Zarr-Python 3 represents a major refactor of the Zarr-Python codebase. Some of the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Zarr-Python 3.0 represents a major refactor of the Zarr-Python codebase. Some of the
```
Or change 3.0 > 3 below - I'd have a soft preference for "3" over "3.0".

Author: changed to 3 in most places except where specifically referring to the 3.0 release.

goals motivating this refactor included:

* adding support for the Zarr V3 specification (along with the Zarr V2 specification)
* cleaning up internal and user facing APIs
* improving performance (particularly in high latency storage environments like

>   cloud object store)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  cloud object stores)
```

To accommodate this, Zarr-Python 3.0 introduces a number of changes to the API, including a number

> of significant breaking changes and pending deprecations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
of significant breaking changes and deprecations.
```

> This page provides a guide highlighting the most notable changes to help you

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This page provides a guide explaing breaking changes and deprecations to help you
```

migrate your code from version 2 to version 3. If we have missed anything, please
open a `GitHub issue <https://github.com/zarr-developers/zarr-python/issues/new>`_
so we can improve this guide.

Compatibility target
--------------------

The goals described above necessitated some breaking changes to the API (hence the
major version update), but where possible we have maintained backwards compatibility
in the most widely used parts of the API. This in the :class:`zarr.Array` and

> :class:`zarr.Group` classes and the "top-level API" (e.g. :func:`zarr.open_array` and

Reviewer: There's a section lower down that explains how breaking changes have happened to `Array` and `Group`, which seems at odds to this statement that backwards compat has been maintained. I'd be pro removing the "Compatibility target" section altogether to avoid this contradiction?

Author: A number of people asked for this explanation so I'm keen to keep it, if you have ideas for how to sharpen it, feel free to suggest additional language.

Reviewer: 👍 I put a suggestion here: https://github.com/zarr-developers/zarr-python/pull/2596/files/9427b10cade59400810890237ff71a10118319ae#r1902114450

> The goals described above necessitated some breaking changes to the API (hence the
> major version update), but where possible we have maintained backwards compatibility
> in the most widely used parts of the API. This in the :class:`zarr.Array` and
> :class:`zarr.Group` classes and the "top-level API" (e.g. :func:`zarr.open_array` and
> :func:`zarr.open_group`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The goals described above necessitated some breaking changes to the API (hence the
major version update), but where possible we have maintained backwards compatibility
with functions in the top-level ``zarr`` namespace (e.g. :func:`zarr.open_array` and :func:`zarr.open_group`).
```

Author: We have also attempted to maintain backward compatibility for the Group/Array classes. Neither the top level API or the Array/Group classes hit 100% backward compatibility.

Getting ready for 3.0
---------------------

Before migrating to Zarr-Python 3, we suggest projects that depend on Zarr-Python take

> the following actions:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the following actions in order:
```

1. Pin the supported Zarr-Python version to ``zarr>=2,<3``. This is a best practice
   and will protect your users from any incompatibilities that may arise during the
   release of Zarr-Python 3.0. This pin can be removed after migrating to Zarr-Python 3.
2. Limit your imports from the Zarr-Python package. Most of the primary API ``zarr.*``
   will be compatible in 3.0. However, the following breaking API changes are planned:

   - ``numcodecs.*`` will no longer be available in ``zarr.*``. To migrate, import codecs
     directly from ``numcodecs``:

     .. code-block:: python

        from numcodecs import Blosc
        # instead of:
        # from zarr import Blosc

   - The ``zarr.v3_api_available`` feature flag is being removed. In Zarr-Python 3.0
     the v3 API is always available, so you shouldn't need to use this flag.
   - The following internal modules are being removed or significantly changed. If
     your application relies on imports from any of the below modules, you will need
     to either a) modify your application to no longer rely on these imports or b)

>      vendor the parts of the specific modules that you need.

Reviewer: There's scope for much more descriptive and helpful info about what's changed/what's gone here. Specifically:

- `zarr.attrs` has moved to `zarr.core.attributes`
- `zarr.codecs` has gone, import from `numcodecs` instead
- `zarr.context` has gone, with no replacement
- `zarr.core.Array` has moved to `zarr.Array` (but see migration notes below on how the `Array` object has changed)
- `zarr.hierarchy.Group` has moved to `zarr.Group` (but see migration notes below on how the `Group` object has changed)
- `zarr.hierarchy.group` and `zarr.hierarchy.open_group` has moved to `zarr.group` and `zarr.open_group`
- `zarr.indexing` has moved to `zarr.core.indexing`
- `zarr.meta` has moved to `zarr.core.metadata.common`, `zarr.core.metadata.v2` and `zarr.core.metadata.v3`
- `zarr.storage` still exists, but <list of thinks that have changed or been deleted>
- `zarr.sync` has gone, with no replacement
- `zarr.util` has gone, with no replacement (since this was always intended to be internal helper code)
- `zarr.n5` has gone, see <link to other repo> for replacement

Author: I did a version of this.

     * ``zarr.attrs``
     * ``zarr.codecs``
     * ``zarr.context``
     * ``zarr.core``
     * ``zarr.hierarchy``
     * ``zarr.indexing``
     * ``zarr.meta``
     * ``zarr.meta_v1``
     * ``zarr.storage``
     * ``zarr.sync``
     * ``zarr.types``
     * ``zarr.util``
     * ``zarr.n5``

> 3. Test that your package works with v3. You can start testing against version 3 now
>    (pre-releases are being published to PyPI weekly).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Test that your package works with v3.
```

   Development and maintenance of the 2.x release series has moved to the
   `support/v2 <https://github.com/zarr-developers/zarr-python/tree/support/v2>`_ branch.
   Issues and pull requests related to this branch are tagged with the
   `V2 <https://github.com/zarr-developers/zarr-python/labels/V2>`_ label.

Migrating to Zarr-Python 3
--------------------------

The following sections provide details on the most important changes in Zarr-Python 3.

The Array class
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

1. Disallow direct construction - the signature for initializing the ``Array`` class has changed
   significantly. Please use :func:`zarr.create_array` or :func:`zarr.open_array` instead of
   directly constructing the :class:`zarr.Array` class.

2. Defaulting to ``zarr_format=3`` - newly created arrays will use the version 3 of the
   Zarr specification. To continue using version 2, set ``zarr_format=2`` when creating arrays
   or set ``default_zarr_version=2`` in Zarr's :ref:`runtime configuration <config>`.

The Group class
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

1. Disallow direct construction - use :func:`zarr.open_group` or :func:`zarr.create_group`
   instead of directly constructing the :class:`zarr.Group` class.

> 2. Most of the h5py compatibility methods are deprecated and will issue warnings if used.
>    The following migration is suggested:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Most of the h5py compatibility methods are deprecated and will issue warnings if used.
   The following functions are drop in replacements that have the same signature and functionality:
```

   - Use :func:`zarr.Group.create_array` in place of :func:`zarr.Group.create_dataset`
   - Use :func:`zarr.Group.require_array` in place of :func:`zarr.Group.require_dataset`

The Store class
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Some of the biggest changes in Zarr-Python 3 are found in the ``Store`` class. The most
notable changes to the Store API are:

1. Replaced the ``MutableMapping`` base class in favor of a custom abstract base class
   (:class:`zarr.abc.store.Store`).
2. Switched to an asynchronous interface for all store methods that result in IO. This
   change ensures that all store methods are non-blocking and are as performant as
   possible.

Beyond the changes store interface, a number of deprecated stores were also removed in Zarr-Python 3.
See :issue:`1274` for more details on the removal of these stores.

- ``N5Store`` - see https://github.com/zarr-developers/n5py for an alternative interface to N5 formatted data.
- ``ABSStore`` - use the :class:`zarr.storage.FsspecStore` instead along with fsspec's `adlfs backend <https://github.com/fsspec/adlfs>`_.

> - ``DBMStore``

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following stores have been removed altogether. Users who need these stores
will have to implement their own version in zarr-python v3.

- ``DBMStore``
```

- Default codecs ``array.v3_default_codecs`` and ``array.v2_default_compressor``
- Whether empty chunks are written to storage ``array.write_empty_chunks``
- Async and threading options, e.g. ``async.concurrency`` and ``threading.max_workers``
- Selections of implementations of codecs, codec pipelines and buffers

Miscellaneous
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

- The keyword argument ``zarr_version`` available in most creation functions in :mod:`zarr`
  (e.g. :func:`zarr.create`, :func:`zarr.open`, :func:`zarr.group`, :func:`zarr.array`) has
  been deprecated in favor of ``zarr_format``.

🚧 Work in Progress 🚧
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Zarr-Python 3 is still under active development, and is not yet fully complete.
The following list summarizes areas of the codebase that we expect to build out
after the 3.0 release. If features listed below are important to your use case of
Zarr-Python, please open (or comment on) a
`GitHub issue <https://github.com/zarr-developers/zarr-python/issues/new>`_.

- The following functions / methods have not been ported to Zarr-Python 3 yet:

  * :func:`zarr.copy` (:issue:`2407`)
  * :func:`zarr.copy_all` (:issue:`2407`)
  * :func:`zarr.copy_store` (:issue:`2407`)

>   * :func:`zarr.Group.move` (:issue:`2108`)

Reviewer: It's a bit confusing that these say they're not ported, but are linked to functions in the API docs (which would imply they are implemented). Do they need removing from the API docs?

Author: All of these exist as stubs in the library but currently raise a `NotImplementedError`

Reviewer: Should we remove them from the API docs then, so the docs don't give a misleading impression they exist?

Author: No opinion on whether to keep them in the API docs.

> - The following options in the top-level API (i.e. creation and convenience functions in

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The following features (corresponding to function arguments to functions in
```

  :mod:`zarr`) have not been ported to Zarr-Python 3 yet.

  * ``cache_attrs``
  * ``cache_metadata``
  * ``chunk_store`` (:issue:`2495`)
  * ``meta_array``
  * ``object_codec`` (:issue:`2617`)
  * ``synchronizer`` (:issue:`1596`)

>   * ``dimension_separator``

Reviewer: All of these, apart from `synchronizer`, aree both present, and documented as working in the [API docs for `zarr.api.asynchronous.create()`](https://zarr.readthedocs.io/en/latest/_autoapi/zarr/api/asynchronous/index.html#zarr.api.asynchronous.create). Does this mean they have been ported, or the docstrings in the API docs need fixing? (or something else?)

Author: We chose to not break the function signature but instead to raise either an error or warning if these options were provided. So yes, they exist in the signature, but they cannot be used.

Reviewer: 👍 I will open an issue to fix the API docs for these then

Reviewer: Would be good to alkso note on this page that they exist in function signatures, but raise errors or warnings.

Author: done.

     * ``zarr.indexing``
     * ``zarr.meta``
     * ``zarr.meta_v1``
     * ``zarr.storage``
     * ``zarr.sync``
     * ``zarr.types``
     * ``zarr.util``
     * ``zarr.n5``

3. Test that your package works with v3. You can start testing against version 3 now
   (pre-releases are being published to PyPI weekly).
4. Update the pin to include ``zarr>=3,<4``.

Zarr-Python 2 support window
----------------------------

Zarr-Python 2.x is still available, though we recommend migrating to Zarr-Python 3 for
its performance improvements and new features. Security and bug fixes will be made to
the 2.x series for at least six months following the first Zarr-Python 3 release.
If you need to use the latest Zarr-Python 2 release, you can install it with:

.. code-block:: console

    $ pip install "zarr==2.*"

.. note::
   Development and maintenance of the 2.x release series has moved to the
   `support/v2 <https://github.com/zarr-developers/zarr-python/tree/support/v2>`_ branch.
   Issues and pull requests related to this branch are tagged with the
   `V2 <https://github.com/zarr-developers/zarr-python/labels/V2>`_ label.

Migrating to Zarr-Python 3
--------------------------

> The following sections provide details on the most important changes in Zarr-Python 3.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following sections provide details on breaking changes in Zarr-Python 3.
```

The Array class
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

1. Disallow direct construction - the signature for initializing the ``Array`` class has changed
   significantly. Please use :func:`zarr.create_array` or :func:`zarr.open_array` instead of
   directly constructing the :class:`zarr.Array` class.

2. Defaulting to ``zarr_format=3`` - newly created arrays will use the version 3 of the
   Zarr specification. To continue using version 2, set ``zarr_format=2`` when creating arrays
   or set ``default_zarr_version=2`` in Zarr's :ref:`runtime configuration <config>`.

The Group class
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

1. Disallow direct construction - use :func:`zarr.open_group` or :func:`zarr.create_group`
   instead of directly constructing the :class:`zarr.Group` class.
2. Most of the h5py compatibility methods are deprecated and will issue warnings if used.
   The following functions are drop in replacements that have the same signature and functionality:

   - Use :func:`zarr.Group.create_array` in place of :func:`zarr.Group.create_dataset`
   - Use :func:`zarr.Group.require_array` in place of :func:`zarr.Group.require_dataset`

The Store class
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> Some of the biggest changes in Zarr-Python 3 are found in the ``Store`` class. The most

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The most
```
